# 7.2: Data Visualisation Concepts

> Alberto Cairo has identified four common features of a good data
> visualisation: It contains reliable information. The design has been chosen so
> that relevant patterns become noticeable. It is presented in an attractive
> manner, but appearance should not get in the way of honesty, clarity and
> depth. When appropriate, it is organized in a way that enables some
> exploration.

@spiegelhalterArtStatisticsLearning2019 [p64]

<!-- TODO: bulk this out; can we be more precise than these broad guides? -->

## Activity 7.2.1

_Allow 1 hour_

Read the article "10 Rules for better Figures" by Nicolas P. Rougier, Michael
Droettboom, and Philip E. Bourne. available at
<https://journals.plos.org/ploscompbiol/article?id=10.1371/journal.pcbi.1003833>
The article outlines ten rules for creating effective and engaging data
visualisations. Take notes on the key points the authors make and consider how
you can apply these rules in your own work.

The rules that the authors outline are a good place to start with any
visualisation project. They help steer you away from common pitfalls and towards
more effective visualisations.

## 1. Understand the Context

## 2. Choose the Right Visualisation

## 3. Simplify

---

## Activity 7.2.x

_Allow 1 hour_

Read Chapter 3 of "Storytelling with Data" by Cole Nussbaumer Knaflic.

---

## 4. Avoid "chartjunk"

---

## Activity 7.2.x

_allow 30 minutes_

the blog post "10 Tips for Better Data Visualisation" by Andy Kirk. available at
<https://www.tableau.com/learn/articles/best-data-visualization-tips>. The post
outlines ten tips for creating effective data visualisations. Take notes on the
key points the author makes and consider how you can apply these tips in your
own work.

---

## 5. Use Colour Effectively

## 6. Use Text Effectively

## 7. Label Clearly

## 8. Use Scales Effectively

## 9. Use Visual Cues

## 10. Tell a story

<!-- TODO: write ~1000 words -->

<!-- TODO: add 2 activities -->
