## Evaluating Datasets

You may have come across the "PROMPT" criteria for evaluating texts. The PROMPT
criteria are a set of questions that can be used to evaluate the quality of a
text. The PROMPT criteria are:

- **Presentation**
  - Is the information presented clearly?
  - Is the language appropriate?
  - Is it succinct?
  - Can I understand it?
- **Relevance**
  - Does this information match my needs right now?
  - What is it mostly about?
- **Objectivity**
  - Is there bias in what you are reading?
  - Might the author/s have any hidden agendas? Have they been selective with
    their evidence?
  - Is the language used emotive?
  - Are opinions expressed?
  - Are there sponsors?
  - What are they selling? A particular product, a corporate view?
  - Is there contribution from different viewpoints by diverse authors to
    provide a balanced overview?
  - Are you selecting sources which confirm your own biases or seeking a broad
    range of perspectives on an issue?
- **Method**
  - Is it clear how any research was carried out?
  - How was data gathered?
  - If statistical data is presented, what is this based on?
  - Do researchers address any differences in outcomes between groups (e.g.,
    ethnic/racial groups)?
  - Were the methods appropriate, rigorous, etc.?
- **Provenance**
  - Is it clear who produced this information?
  - Where does it come from? Whose opinions are these?
  - Do you trust this source of information?
  - Are there references/citations that lead to further reading, and are they
    trustworthy sources?
- **Timeliness**
  - When was it produced or published? Do any of the sources reinforce
    stereotypes or represent other outdated views?
  - Is it current?
  - Has the climate/situation changed since this information was made available?
  - Is it still up to date?
