# Week 4: Data Manipulation

This week, we will continue to look at data manipulation, specifically how we
can work around data quality issues that we have identified in our datasets.
This week will continue in the technical vein of last week, with a focus on
practical activities and exercises. We will also look at how we can use data
manipulation to create our own datasets. By the end of this week, you will be
able to identify and address data quality issues in your datasets and create
your own datasets for use in your data science projects. The other focus of this
week will be on the assessment for this module. We will look at the assessment
criteria and unpack what is required for each section. This will help you to
understand what is expected of you and how you can achieve the best possible
grade for your assessment.

## How to use your time this week

this week will have both theoretical and practical components. You will be using
tools and techniques to manipulate data and synthesise your own datasets. You
will also be looking at the assessment criteria for this module and unpacking
what is required for each section. The majority of your time should be spent on
the activities and exercises.

| Section | Theme                          | Time    |
| ------- | ------------------------------ | ------- |
| 4.0     | Introduction                   | 2 hour  |
| 4.1     | Working with Unexpected Values | 2 hours |
| 4.2     | Data Cleansing                 | 2 hours |
| 4.3     | Manipulating Data              | 2 hours |
| 4.4     | Conclusion                     | 1 hour  |

## Activity 4.0.1

_Allow 1 hour_

The website [Papers with Code](https://paperswithcode.com/) collects research
papers and the code that accompanies them. this means you Should be able to
replicate their results. It also provides a good insight into how we can
academically represent our research. Have a look through the site for topics
you're interested in. What papers did you find? What code did you find? What did
you learn?
