# Data Cleansing

Data cleansing is the process of detecting and correcting (or removing) corrupt
or inaccurate records from a record set, table, or database. It refers to
identifying incomplete, incorrect, inaccurate, irrelevant, or missing parts of
the data and then replacing, modifying, or deleting the dirty or coarse data.
Data cleansing is an essential part of data management and is a crucial step in
data analysis. In databases, a common practice is to develop solutions to ensure
captured data is clean before it is written to the database. This is often done
through the use of constraints and triggers.

In the previous section we discussed how to identify unexpected values in our
data. In this section, we will look at how to handle these issues, and cleanse
our data to ensure that it is accurate and reliable. Data cleansing is an
essential step in the data analysis process, as dirty data can lead to
inaccurate results and misleading conclusions. Data cleansing involves a variety
of techniques, including data imputation, outlier detection, and data
transformation.

<!-- TODO: write ~1000 words -->

## Handling Missing Data

### Imputation

Imputation is the process of replacing missing data with substituted values.

### Dropping

Dropping missing data is the simplest way to handle missing data.

### interpolation

Interpolation is the process of estimating missing values based on the values of
other data points.

## Handling Outliers

### Z-Score

The Z-score is a measure of how many standard deviations an element is from the
mean.

### Knowing when to drop outliers

Ultimately, knowing when to drop outliers is a judgement call. Statistical
methods may provide guidance, but the decision to drop outliers should be based
on domain knowledge and the goals of the analysis. Your analysis may become
flawed if you drop outliers that are actually valid data points, for instance
the discovery of ozone layer depletion was delayed because "automated data
collection tools discarded readings that were too low."
@oreillyradarteamBigDataNow2011 [p10]

<!-- TODO: add 5 activities -->

<!-- TODO: find new topic -->

<!-- TODO: write ~1000 words -->

<!-- TODO: add 5 activities -->
