# Creating Your Own Datasets

Last week we looked at how to find and evaluate existing datasets. This week we
will look at how to create your own datasets using tools such as APIs, SQL, and
web scraping. By the end of this week, you will be able to create your own
datasets for use in your data science projects.

This week will be more technical than the previous weeks. If you are not
familiar with programming, you may find some of the concepts challenging. Please
try to dedicate the time to follow the activities and complete the exercises. If
you get stuck, please ask for help in the forums.

## How to use your time this week

The learning this week intends to be more practical than theoretical. There is a
fair amount of theory to work through however, particularly if you are new to
databases and SQL. Many of the concepts we will encounter in this section have
application in data science generally, for instance, joining datasets in SQL has
parallels in pandas; learning the concepts here will help you to understand the
tools you will use throughout in the course. You will be using tools and
techniques to create your own datasets. Although there will be some readings to
bolster this learning, the majority of your time should be spent on the
activities and exercises.

| Section   | Theme            | Time         |
| --------- | ---------------- | ------------ |
| 3.0       | Introduction     | 3 hours      |
| 3.1       | Databases        | 9 hours      |
| 3.2       | Data Warehousing | 2 hours      |
| 3.3       | Web APIs         | 3 hours      |
| 3.4       | Web Scraping     | 3 hours      |
| 3.5       | Data Cleansing   | 2 hours      |
| 3.6       | Conclusion       | 1 hour       |
| **Total** |                  | **23 hours** |

This section will take longer to complete than other weeks. If you find yourself
struggling with the concepts, you may find it helpful to focus on the database
and data cleansing sections first. These sections form part of the core skill
set for Data science; it is highly unlikely that you can perform meaningful
analysis without a grounding in them. Obtaining information via Web APIs and web
scraping are more advanced topics that are more likely to be used in
programming, or data engineering roles. If you are not familiar with
programming, you may find these sections challenging. Having a understanding of
these topics may, however make some of the exercises later on in this course
easier to complete.
