# APIs

When people talk about APIs, they are usually referring to web APIs. These are
the APIs that allow you to interact with a web server. You can use them to send
and receive data from a server, and they are often used to build web
applications. The majority of web apis are `RESTful` APIs. REST stands for
Representational State Transfer. It is a set of rules that developers follow
when they create their API. One of the rules is that you should be able to get a
piece of data (called a resource) when you link to a specific URL. Each URL is
called a request, and the data that is sent back to you is called a response.

RESTful APIs are often built on top of a traditional relational database.
Instead of returning the entire database, the API returns only the data that the
developer requests. Another designed feature is that APIs are _read optimised_.
API developers typically spend a lot of effort designing the API to return data
that easy to read and use. Thinking back to our database examples in the
previous unit, we might expect the the API to return a representation of the
user, complete with their name, email address, and other details, rather than
just a user ID, for instance:

```json
{
  "name": "Jane Doe",
  "date_of_birth": "1990-01-01",
  "address": {
    "street": "1 Brownberrie Ln",
    "city": "Horsforth",
    "county": "Leeds",
    "postcode": "LS18 5HD"
  },
  "email": "Jane@doe.com",
  "phone": "0113 123 4567"
}
```

RESTful APIs typically return data in a format called JSON. JSON stands for
JavaScript Object Notation. It is a way of representing data that is easy for
both people and computers to read and write. `JSON` provides a set of `key` and
`value` pairs, where the `key` is a string and the `value` can be a string,
number, boolean, array, or another object.

In the above example, if we wanted to look up Jane Doe's address, we would look
in the `JSON` object for the `address` key, and then look for the `street`,
`city`, `county`, and `postcode` keys.

Using APIs is typically done in code, but there are some tools that can help you
interact with APIs without writing any code. One of the most popular tools is
called `Postman`. Postman is a tool that allows you to send requests to an API
and see the response. It is a great way to explore an API and see what data is
available.

## Activity 3.2.1: Install/Register Postman

_20 minutes_

Postman can be used in one of two ways, either as a standalone application or as
a browser extension. The following activities will work in either version, but
you will need to either install the standalone application or register for a
free account to use the online version.

### Using the online version

In a browser, navigate to the [Postman website](https://www.postman.com/). Click
on the `Sign Up For Free` button in the top right corner of the page. You will
need to provide an email address and create a password. Once you have signed up,
you will be taken to the Postman dashboard.

### Using the standalone application

To use the standalone application, you will need to download and install it. You
can download the application from the
[Postman website](https://www.postman.com/downloads/). Once you have installed
the application, you will need to sign in with the account you created in the
previous step. If you want to install the application using a package manager,
there are pre-packaged versions available for Windows, MacOS, and Linux.

| Operating System | install                       |
| ---------------- | ----------------------------- |
| MacOS            | `brew install --cask postman` |
| Windows          | `winget install postman`      |
| Linux            | `snap install postman`        |


https://open-meteo.com/
