# Week 5: Hypothesis Testing


This week, we will be looking at hypothesis testing. Hypothesis testing is a
fundamental concept in statistics and data science. It allows us to make inferences
about a population based on a sample. We will look at the different types of tests abd strategies for choosing the right test for your data. We will also look at how to interpret the results of a hypothesis test and how to draw conclusions from them. By the end of this week, you will be able to conduct hypothesis tests and interpret the results in the context of your data science projects.  

## How to use your time this week

This week will have both theoretical and practical components. You will be using tools and techniques to conduct hypothesis tests and interpret the results. The majority of your time should be spent on the activities and exercises.

| Section | Theme                       | Time    |
| ------- | --------------------------- | ------- |
| 5.0     | Introduction                | 2 hour  |
| 5.1     | Types of Hypothesis Tests   | 2 hours |
| 5.2     | Choosing the Right Test     | 2 hours |
| 5.3     | Interpreting Results        | 2 hours |
| 5.4     | Conclusion                  | 1 hour  |


## Context

> The Numbers have no way of speaking for themselves. We speak for them. We
> imbue them with meaning.

@silverSignalNoiseArt2013

Context is the information that surrounds the data. It is the information that
tells us what the data is about. Fundamentally, data without context is
meaningless. Data with context is _information_ Context is essential both in
understanding the raw data, and presenting our findings. Without context, we
cannot hope to understand whether our analysis is accurate or not.

Often, the context is not explicit in the data. It is up to the data scientist
to find the context, and to use it to interrogate the data. This is why data
science is as much an art as a science. It is the art of finding the context,
and using it to interpret and present the data.

## Activity 5.0.1

_Allow 1 hour_

> How many trees are there on our planet?

This question was posed by David Spiegelhalter in his book "The Art of
Statistics" @spiegelhalterArtStatisticsLearning2019. How could we possibly
answer this? Try to think about how you would go about answering this question, what data would you need, and how would you interpret it?

### Discussion

We could jump into looking at forests and working out the density
of trees, and extrapolating a value from that, but there is a more fundamental
first step, we need to know _what is a tree_? Fortunately for us, there are
definitions we can use.

> Trees are woody plants having a more or less erect perennial stem(s) capable
> of achieving at least 3 inches (7.6 cm) in diameter at breast height, or 5
> inches (12.7 cm) diameter at root collar and a height of 16.4 feet (5.0
> meters) at maturity in situ. @nelsonDefiningUnitedStates2020. Though disputed
> (e.g., @brokawDBH2000) this provides a starting point for our investigation.

## Reading Activity
_Allow 30 minutes_

Context is explored in the the first chapter of "Storytelling with Data: A Data
Visualization Guide For Professionals" by Cole Nussbaumer Knaflic. This book is
available in the library.
