# 6.2: Exploratory Data Analysis

This week, we will be looking at exploratory data analysis. Exploratory data
Analysis is a process of examining, cleaning, transforming, and visualizing data
to understand its structure and patterns. It allows us to explore the data and
to draw insights from it. We will look at the different techniques and tools
that we can use to explore the data and to draw insights from it. We will also
look at how to visualize data to quickly explore trends and patterns.
Visualization is a broad topic, and one that will be revisited later in the
course. By the end of this week, you will be able to conduct exploratory data
analysis and present your findings in the context of your data science projects.

## Actvity 6.2.1

_Allow 1 hour_

[Nightingale Magazine](https://nightingaledvs.com/) has an excellent series on
Data Exploration. Read the first article in the series,
[Getting to Know Your Data](https://nightingaledvs.com/data-exploration-step-1-getting-to-know-your-data/),
and answer the following questions:

1. What is the purpose of exploratory data analysis?
2. What are the key steps in exploratory data analysis?
3. How can exploratory data analysis fit within a larger analysis framework such
   as CRISP-DM?

<!--Todo: introduce a framework-->

## Activity 6.2.2

_Allow 1 hour_

Read Chapter five of **Becoming a Data Head** by Gutman and Goldmeier. This
chapter covers exploratory data analysis and is a good introduction to the
topic. Answer the following questions:

1. what strategies can you use to explore your data?
2. how can we use _outliers_ to identify potential issues with our data?
3. what are some common visualisation techniques that can be used to explore
   data?
