# Week 1: Introduction

Welcome to the course. This course is designed to give you a practical
introduction to data science and visualisation. As a Masters-level course, it is
expected that you will be able to work independently and to a high standard.
This course is designed to give you the skills you need to be able to work with
data and to present your findings in a clear and compelling way.

## Learning Outcomes

This module intends to furnish you with the skills and knowledge to be able to
become a data scientist. More specifically, you will be able to:

1. Demonstrate a comprehensive understanding of data analytics, modelling and
   management
2. Apply and critically evaluate various analytical software tools for modelling
   and managing data
3. Visualise data, recognise patterns, communicate knowledge and inform decision
   making for organisations to create value, improve performance and create
   business opportunities.
4. Gain critical understanding of data analytics' challenges and be able to
   interpret the results from data and data analytics' algorithms
5.

## First Things First

> Look at the module guide and the assessment briefs. Make sure you understand
> what is expected of you and what you need to do to pass the module. Make sure
> you understand the deadlines and the assessment criteria. Whilst the
> terminology may be unfamiliar at this stage, it should give you an
> understanding of what is required, when. If you have any questions, let your
> tutor know. It is a good idea to get the deadlines in your calendar now, so
> you can plan your time effectively.

## How you should use your time

| Section   | Theme                                   | Time         |
| --------- | --------------------------------------- | ------------ |
| 1.0       | Introduction                            | 1 hour       |
| 1.1       | What is Data Science?                   | 2 hours      |
| 1.2       | Case Study: The financial Crash of 2008 | 5 hours      |
| 1.3       | Problem Definition                      | 2 hours      |
| 1.4       | Building Blocks of Data Science         | 1 hour       |
| 1.5       | Conclusion                              | 1 hour       |
| **Total** |                                         | **12 hours** |

The course is delivered in ten blocks. Each block will have around 15 to 20
hours of study. You should also set aside some time for working on the two
assignments. Ideally, you will study these over ten weeks rather than try to cram
the entire course in a single week. The assessments are designed to be
cumulative, so it is important that you understand the material in each block
before moving on to the next.

## [Week 1](1.1.md)

In week one, we will introduce the fundamental concepts and terminology and give
you a flavour of what you can expect.

## [Week 2](../02/2.0.md)

In week two, we will look at how to find and evaluate existing datasets.

## [Week 3](../03/3.0.md)

In week three, we will look at how to extract data from various sources.

## [Week 4](../04/4.0.md)

In week four, we will look at how to manipulate data, and unpack the first
assessment.

## [Week 5](../05/5.0.md)

In week five, we will look at hypothesis testing.

## [Week 6](../06/6.0.md)

In week six, we will look at exploratory data analysis.

## [Week 7](../07/7.0.md)

In week seven, we will look at how to visualise data.

## [Week 8](../08/8.0.md)

In week eight, we will look at how to tell stories with data.

## [Week 9](../09/9.0.md)

In week nine, we will look at other tools that can be used in data science and
visualisation.

## [Week 10](../10/10.0.md)

In week ten, we consolidate the learning so far and look at the final
assessment.
