# Introduction

> “Data! data! data!” he cried impatiently. “I can’t make bricks without clay.”

@doyleAdventureCopperBeeches1986 [p4]

Data Science is the study of data to find insights and trends. It is a
multidisciplinary field that uses techniques from statistics, machine learning,
and computer science to analyse and interpret complex data. Data visualisation
is the process of presenting data in a visual format, such as charts, graphs,
and maps, to help people understand the data and make informed decisions.

In this course we will explore the key concepts and techniques of data science
and data visualisation, and learn how to apply them to real-world problems. We
will cover topics such as data cleaning, data wrangling, data analysis, and data
visualisation. The course purposefully doesn't focus on specific tools or
programming languages, but rather on the underlying concepts and techniques that
are common to all data science and data visualisation projects. As a data
scientist, you may not have free-choice of tools, so it is important to
understand the underlying principles and techniques that are common to all data
science projects.

## What Is Data Science?

Data Science is an essential part tool in the modern economy. It underpins the
AI revolution and is used in a wide range of industries, from finance to
healthcare to marketing. Data Science underpins our ability to:

1. Understand our customers better
2. Make informed decisions
3. develop new products and services

<!--TODO: add examples-->

Though you may associate Data Science with big tech companies or finance, it is
increasingly essential to a broad range of industries. Universities will use
data science to track and understand student performance to improve teaching and
support. Healthcare providers use data science to improve patient outcomes.
Governments use data science to improve public services. Data science is
_everywhere_.

## Types of Data Science

Data Science can be divided into four main areas. These areas are not mutually
exclusive, and many data scientists will work across multiple areas.

![Types of Data Science](Assets/Analytics_types.png)

### Descriptive Analytics

Descriptive analytics uses data to describe _what_ has happened in the past. For
example, a company might use descriptive analytics to analyze sales data to
understand trends and patterns. You'll try your hand at descriptive analytics
later in this week.

### Diagnostic Analytics

Diagnostic analytics uses data to understand _why_ something happened. For
example, a company might use diagnostic analytics to analyze customer feedback
to understand why sales have dropped. You'll try your hand at diagnostic
analytics later in this course.

### Predictive Analytics

Predictive analytics uses historical data to predict _how_ likely something is
to happen in the future. For example, a company might use predictive analytics
to forecast sales or customer churn.

### Prescriptive Analytics

Prescriptive analytics uses data to recommend actions to achieve a desired
outcome. For example, a company might use prescriptive analytics to optimise its
supply chain or marketing strategy.

## What is a Data Scientist?

A Data Scientist is someone who can produce the above types of analysis. Being
"good at data" is not enough, _the medium is not the message_. The best data
scientists are able to communicate their findings clearly and effectively, work
with stakeholders to understand their needs, and develop solutions that meet
those needs. According to @davenportDataScientistSexiest2012 the traditional
route into data science was through a deep understanding of statistics; the job
was dominated by people with PhDs in theoretical physics or statistics. However,
the field has evolved, and data scientists now come from a wide range of
backgrounds, including computer science, engineering, and social sciences. The
key skills of a data scientist are:

- **Technical skills**: Data scientists need to be proficient in programming
  languages such as Python or R, and have a good understanding of statistics and
  machine learning algorithms.
- **Mathematical skills**: Data scientists need to be able to analyse data and
  draw meaningful conclusions from it. Whilst software packages such as Excel,
  SPSS, R and Python can help, it is important to understand the underlying
  principles of statistics.
- **Communication skills**: Data scientists need to be able to communicate their
  findings to a non-technical audience. This might involve creating
  visualisations, writing reports, or giving presentations.

Whilst these are core skills for a data science, there are many other skills
that are useful. For example, data scientists need to be able to work with
stakeholders to understand their needs, and develop solutions that meet those
needs. They also need to be able to work with large datasets, and have a good
understanding of data wrangling and cleaning techniques. Data scientists also
need to be able to work with uncertainty, and be able to make decisions based on
incomplete or imperfect data. underpinning all of these skills is a curious
mind, and a willingness to experiment and learn new things. Data science is a
rapidly evolving field, and data scientists need to be able to adapt to new
technologies and techniques.

![The attributes of a Data Scientist](Assets/DataScientistAttributes.png)

Image courtesy of @patilDataDriven2015 [p3]

## Data Literacy

The three key attributes of a data scientist mentioned above can be summarised
as "data literacy". Data literacy is the ability to read, work with, analyse,
and argue with data. It is a critical skill for the modern world, and is
essential for making informed decisions. Data literacy is not just about
understanding data, it is about understanding the context in which the data was
collected, and being able to interpret and communicate the findings. Data
literacy is essential for anyone working with data, from data scientists to
business analysts to policy makers. It is a skill that can be learned, and is
essential for anyone working with data.

It's worth noting that the audience for our data analysis also need a level of
data literacy. If we are presenting our findings to a non-technical audience, we
need to be able to communicate our findings in a way that is clear and
compelling. This might involve creating visualisations, writing reports, or
giving presentations. It is important to understand the needs of our audience,
and to tailor our communication to meet those needs. There is an implicit need
to help our audience develop their data literacy, so that they can understand
and interpret the data we present to them.

## Activity 1.1.1

_Allow 1 hour_

Read chapter 19 of **The State of Open Data: Histories and Horizons** by Tim
Davies and Stephen Walker. This discusses the issues and importance of data
literacy. Consider the following questions:

- How can we define "data literacy"?
- Why is data literacy important?
- How can we improve data literacy?
