## Asking the right questions

Not all problems are as complex as the 2008 financial crisis, but all problems
require a similar systematic approach to interrogate.

The starting point for any analysis is to develop an understanding what the
problem is that you are trying to solve. This may seem obvious, but it is often
the most difficult part of the process. Without this, it It is easy to get lost
in the data, and to lose sight of _meaning_.

@gutmanBecomingDataHead2021 [p4] suggest a series of questions to help define
the problem:

1. Why is this problem important?
2. Who does this problem affect?
3. What if we don’t have the right data?
4. When is the project over?
5. What if we don’t like the results?

Using these questions we can define the scope and scale of the project and
ensure that we are focusing on the right problem. Not only will this ensure we
focus on the right things, it will also make it easier to develop our analyses,
and draw robust conclusions. As we progress through the course, we will return
to these questions to help us define the problems we are trying to solve.

### Activity 1.3.1

_Allow 1 hour_

Read the first chapter of **Becoming a Data Head - How to Think, Speak, and
Understand Data Science, Statistics, and Machine Learning** What other questions
could you consider when defining a data science problem? Add your thoughts to
the discussion forum.

#### Discussion

When approaching a novel problem, it can be difficult to know where to start. It
is common to be working on a problem where the issue is clear to the
stakeholders, but we lack the nuance to understand the problem fully. In other
situations, stakeholders can suggest a solution to a hypothesis that has not
been tested. In these cases, it can be helpful to ask a series of questions to
help us understand the problem better. Here are some questions you could
consider when defining a data science problem:

#### Who are the stakeholders we can talk to to understand the problem?

As data scientists, it is our job to transform data into information. We can
only hope to do this if we have a deep understanding of the problem we are
trying to solve. A good first step is to understand the context of the problem.
Who believes it's a problem, why? How long has this problem occurred? What are
the consequences of the problem? In order to communicate our findings
effectively, we need to understand the problem from the perspective of the
stakeholders as well as the data.

We may find ourselves working on problems in unfamiliar domains. In these cases,
it can be helpful to talk to those affected by or involved in the problem. This
can help us to understand the problem from their perspective, and to ensure that
we are focusing on the right things. Stakeholders can also help us unpack
unfamiliar terminology and acronyms, and to understand the problem in the
context of the domain.

#### What data sources are available to us?

If we are lucky, there dataset openly available to us that contains all the data
we could possibly need. More commonly we will need to collect data from multiple
sources, or to collect our own data. In some cases, we may need to collect data
from scratch. In these cases, it is important to consider what data is available
to us. It may be that we can obtain customer data, but this is pseudonymised. It
may be that we can obtain data from a government department, but this is
aggregated. It may be that we can obtain data from a company, but this is
incomplete. It is important to consider what data is available to us, and to
consider whether we need to collect more data, or to aggregate multiple
datasets.

##### Do I have enough data to draw robust conclusions?

Whilst there may be vast datasets available, it is important to consider whether
you have _enough data to draw robust conclusions_. If you are working with a
small dataset, you may need to consider whether you need to collect more data,
aggregate with other datasets or if it is appropriate to draw robust conclusions
from the data you have. If you are working back from a hypothesis, you may need
to consider whether you have enough data to test the hypothesis thoroughly. If
you cannot, you may need to consider whether you need to collect more data, or
to refine your hypothesis.

##### What are the limitations of the data?

It is important to consider the limitations of the data you are working with.
For example, you may need to consider whether the data is representative of the
population you are interested in, whether the data is accurate, and whether the
data is up-to-date.

##### Do I need to aggregate the data in some way?

Online datasets are often purposefully aggregated to protect privacy. Instead of
seeing individual data which could be used to identify individuals, you may see
aggregated data. You should consider whether the the problem you are trying to
solve needs disaggregated data. If it does, perhaps you need to collect your own
data, or aggregate multiple datasets.

##### What is the quality of the data?

If you are working with "raw" data (e.g., data which has not been processed to
make it easier to analyse), you may need to identify and remedy data issues.
This can be an onerous task, requiring both contextual knowledge to understand
what the data _means_ as well as how to handle data which falls outside of this
meaning. You should carefully consider the quality of the data you are working
with, and consider whether you need to clean the data before you can draw robust
conclusions.
