## Asking the right questions

Not all problems are as complex as the 2008 financial crisis.

==TODO: BULK THIS OUT==

A good place to start with data science is understanding what problem you are
trying to solve or interrogate.

@gutmanBecomingDataHead2021 [p. 4] suggest that the first step in any data
science project is to define the problem you are trying to solve. They introduce
a series of questions that can help you define the problem:

1. Why is this problem important?
2. Who does this problem affect?
3. What if we don’t have the right data?
4. When is the project over?
5. What if we don’t like the results?

By asking these questions up front, we can define the scope of the project and
ensure that we are focusing on the right problem. This will help us to ensure we
focus on the right things, and that we are able to draw robust conclusions from
our analysis. As we progress through the course, we will return to these
questions to help us define the problems we are trying to solve.

### Reading:

Becoming a Data Head - How to Think, Speak, and Understand Data Science,
Statistics, and Machine Learning Chapter 1

### Activity 1.X

> what other questions could you consider when defining a data science problem?
> Add your thoughts to the discussion forum.

#### Discussion

When approaching a novel problem, it can be difficult to know where to start. It
is common to be working on a problem where the issue is clear to the
stakeholders, but we lack the nuance to understand the problem fully. In these
cases, it can be helpful to ask a series of questions to help us understand the
problem better. Here are some questions you could consider when defining a data
science problem:

#### who are the stakeholders we can talk to to understand the problem?

As data scientists, it is our job to transform data into information. We can
only hope to do this if we have a deep understanding of the problem we are
trying to solve. A good first step is to understand the context of the problem.
Who believes it's a problem, why? How long has this problem occurred? What are
the consequences of the problem? In order to communicate our findings
effectively, we need to understand the problem from the perspective of the
stakeholders as well as the data.

We may find ourselves working on problems in unfamiliar domains. In these cases,
it can be helpful to talk to those affected by or involved in the problem. This
can help us to understand the problem from their perspective, and to ensure that
we are focusing on the right things. Stakeholders can also help us unpack
unfamiliar terminology and acronyms, and to understand the problem in the
context of the domain.

#### What data sources are available to us?

==TODO==

##### Do I have enough data to draw robust conclusions?

Whilst there may be vast datasets available, it is important to consider whether
you have _enough data to draw robust conclusions_. If you are working with a
small dataset, you may need to consider whether you need to collect more data,
aggregate with other datasets or if it is appropriate to draw robust conclusions
from the data you have.

##### What are the limitations of the data?

It is important to consider the limitations of the data you are working with.
For example, you may need to consider whether the data is representative of the
population you are interested in, whether the data is accurate, and whether the
data is up-to-date.

##### Do I need to aggregate the data in some way?

Online datasets are often purposefully aggregated to protect privacy. You should
consider whether the the problem you are trying to solve needs de-aggregated
data. If it does, perhaps you need to collect your own data, or aggregate
multiple datasets.

##### What is the quality of the data?

Often, raw data is messy and needs to be cleaned before it can be analysed. You
should consider whether the data you are working with is clean, or whether you
need to clean it before you can analyze it.
