# D3 and Web for Data Science

D3 is a JavaScript library that is used to create interactive data
visualisations in web browsers. D3 stands for Data-Driven Documents, and is
designed to make it easy to bind data to the DOM (Document Object Model) and
create dynamic visualisations. D3 is built on top of web standards such as HTML,
SVG, and CSS, and is designed to work seamlessly with other web technologies.
Unlike the other tools we have looked at, D3 can be considered a tool within a
tool, as it is designed to be used in conjunction with other web technologies to
create interactive data visualisations. You will find D3 used in web-based
visualisations from news sites such as the New York Times. D£ also forms part of
the Mermaid library, which is used to create diagrams in markdown.

## Examples of D3 Visualisations

D3 is a powerful tool that can be used to create a wide range of visualisations.
There is an excellent gallery of examples on the D3 website, which you can find
[here](https://d3js.org/). @chowBestCollegeMajors2020's repo
[here](https://cuthchow.github.io/college-majors-visualisation/) gives a good
real-world example of a D3 visualisation that provokes the user to explore the
data. This type of visualisation shows the power of D3. Instead of presenting
the data as a _fait accompli_, the user is encouraged to explore the data and
draw their own conclusions. This is a powerful way of opening dialogue with both
the data and the audience.

## D3 and Web Technologies

Unlike the other tools we have looked at, D3 is designed to work with other web
technologies. This means that you can use D3 to create interactive
visualisations that are embedded in web pages. This is a powerful way of sharing
data with a wide audience, as it allows you to create visualisations that can be
viewed on any device with a web browser. D3 visualisations can be embedded in
web pages, blog posts, and other online content, making it easy to share your
work with others. This is a powerful way of sharing data with a wide audience,
as it allows you to create visualisations that can be viewed on any device with
a web browser. D3 visualisations can be embedded in web pages, blog posts, and
other online content, making it easy to share your work with others. This ease
of consumption brings different challenges. Where we might be able to create a
visualisation based on millions of data points in a Jupyter notebook, we might
need to consider the impact of loading that data in a web page. Clearly we can't
load a massive dataset every time a user visits a page, so we need to consider
how we can make our visualisations interactive and engaging without frustrating
the user with long load times, or our operations team with high server costs.

<!-- TODO: write ~1000 words -->

<!-- TODO: add 5 activities -->
