## Developing Narratives

When developing narratives, we need to start with the data. We cannot hope to
develop a narrative before we understand it. We may be presented with a
narrative, for instance "tell me why sales are down", but we need to understand
the data before we can answer that question. Once we have this understanding, we
can develop a narrative around it. This isn't to say that we should ignore the
question; it can guide what we look at or for in the data, but we need to be
open to the data telling us something different.

## Activity 8.1.1

_Allow 1 hour_

Read Chapter 7 of Cole Nussbaummer Knaflic's _Storytelling with Data_ and take
notes on the key points she makes about developing narratives.

## Examples of compelling narratives

Data storytelling can take many forms, from simple charts and graphs to
interactive dashboards and multimedia presentations. Unlike the visualisation
methods we have encountered, data storytelling is about creating a narrative
around the data to communicate insights and findings to stakeholders. Here are
some examples of compelling data storytelling:

### Can you live on the minimum wage?

The New York Times is renowned for its data-driven journalism. It regularly wins
[awards](https://nightingaledvs.com/capturing-one-million-deaths-on-a-page-carrie-mifsud/)
for its' visualisations. One of its more compelling examples is the "Can You
Live on the Minimum Wage?" calculator. This interactive tool allows users to
experience the challenges of living on minimum wage by making financial
decisions. It uses data to create a powerful narrative about the struggles faced
by low-income workers. By adding in your monthly expenses, you can see the money
disappearing from your paycheck, and how difficult it is to make ends meet. This
interactive graphic is so powerful because it shows the cumulative effects of
balancing expenses and income, and how quickly money can disappear. The visual
also explains what each expense is, what a "normal" value would look like; and
context to each of the categories.
<https://www.nytimes.com/interactive/2014/02/09/opinion/minimum-wage.html>

### The Pudding's Analysis of Songwriter Gender Representation

The Pudding is a digital publication that uses data to create visually stunning
and informative representations of music. One of their most compelling
visualizations is their analysis of gender representation in songwriting.

<https://pudding.cool/2023/07/songwriters/>

What makes this visualization so compelling is the way it uses colour and visual
cues to highlight the disparities in gender representation. As you scroll
through the visualization, you see the stark differences between male and female
gender representation in songwriting. The visualizations are easy to understand
and visually appealing, making it easy for the audience to grasp the key
insights.

<!-- TODO: write ~700 words -->

<!-- TODO: add 4 activities -->
